and I think we're on the cusp of this is
that we're going to see that our
theological presuppositions and our
biological presuppositions are pointing
in precisely the same direction well
that yes and that feels like the sort of
implicit theme of our conversation so
far right we've been talking about the
monad and we've been talking about you
know High te Heroes right right right is
it that our science will finally catch
up to our philosophy and theology or is
it that we write convenient Just So
Stories to explain what is actually
being dictated at a more Primal based
level I don't think they're convenient
Just So Stories because I think they're
they're as correct as anything can be
[Music]
correct hello everybody I had the
opportunity today to speak with Jamie
wheel who's author of recapture the
Rapture and uh we talked about his book
and his thoughts and my thoughts and my
new book as well today um I have a book
coming out in November called we who
wrestle with God and jimie and I are
walking parallel paths in many ways and
that's not surprising because like every
historical moment has its Zeitgeist
right its spirit and that speaks through
many people simultaneously and we talked
about exactly what that might mean Jamie
concentrates for example in this book on
what's been come to be known as the
meaning crisis and Associates that with
the Nichi and death of God which is the
appropriate Association the demolition
of the higher Unity that say held
Western culture together and gave it its
enthusiastic impetus over the last 2,000
years um we've exhausted that in a sense
and because of that people are
hedonistic and nihilistic and hopeless
and anxious and lost and that's not a
wonderful condition now one of the
consequences of such conditions
mythologically speaking is that it's at
those times when something new is born
that's why Christ is born at the darkest
point of the year for example it's very
common mythological Motif and we examine
today what it is that died I would say
and also what it is that's in the
difficult process of being born and what
beneficial and monstrous forms that
might take and how that's making itself
manifest in the popular and intellectual
culture and
so join us for that
inquiry so one of the centerpieces of of
the argument that you make in this book
recapture the
Rapture is um derived from n's favorite
famous observation about the death of
God so I thought maybe we could
start by talking about that
it seems to me that if you wanted to
secularize that discussion you'd do it
in something approximating the following
manner you'd assume that there's only
two possibilities and one possibility
would be that our perceptions and our
thoughts and our goal directed
striving moves towards something
approximating a higher order
transcendental Unity or it doesn't those
are the only two options as far as I can
tell and the idea of a monotheistic God
at the bottom of everything or at the
top is an elaboration of the idea that
all the things that human beings are
oriented
towards come together in a unity and the
problem
with questioning that hypothesis is that
you fall into the problem that there's
no organizing principle at all that's
the problem of nihilism
or alternatively you fall into the
problem that if there's nothing that
unites our striving at the highest level
then we have to live in psychological
and social conflict because the various
things that drive us will be
antagonistic to one another so you fall
into the problem of nihilism or a
disunified plurality another problem
emerges too and and both n and doeski
pointed to this because they were
thinking along par parallel tracks which
is that if the hypothesis that has
served as the highest
Unity
disappears and a Unity is
psychologically and socially necessary
then other forms of unity will emerge to
replace the
dead value and so I would say and this
also follows n and dov's thought that
one of the things that we've seen
happening in consequence of the death of
God apart from nihilism and plurality is
the insistence that power for example
unifies that's a Marxist insistence or a
post-modern insistence that the only
unifying narrative is one of power and
so the unity problem looks to me like
it's inescapable whether you approach it
from a religious perspective or a
secular perspective and that's the
landscape of the problem as far as I can
tell like all of those different
consequences let's say of the death of
God are to problematic to say the least
I I'll close with one other observation
because it's in some ways what you're
striving towards as far as I can tell in
this
book if there's a
Unity at the Pinnacle let's
say
then what is its nature and also what
should be its nature so I would say for
example that attempting to unify
yourself or a society on the basis of
power is a
counterproductive Enterprise that's not
a principle that's going to produce an
iterable game a continually playable
game an expandable game or a desirable
game so well those are some you know
I've been meditating on what you've read
written and those are some of the
thoughts that came to mind so I guess
I'd be interested in your thoughts on on
those
issues yeah I mean I think the first
thing just to clarify is that everybody
knows the God is dead bumper sticker
slogan for not everybody knows the rest
of that paragraph right not everybody
knows the rest of the paragraph so
people think of it as sort of like tap
dancing on the grave of belief of piety
that this is a move to modernity and
Atheism but it was actually a caution n
was saying hey um you know modernity is
killing our Gods but be careful when you
kill your God because when you kill your
God you rip out the entire social moral
construct that underpins Faith devotion
and belief which I think is what you're
speaking about about the ultimate truth
and when you rip away something that is
demanding reverence or
submission Union and you replace it with
merely politicized power games that can
be held to pay
so we could start by talking
about
[Music]
depression depressed people are sad and
frustrated and disappointed they tend to
feel all negative emotions
simultaneously in a manner that's
paralyzing depression is fundamentally a
biochemical disorder one of the things I
tried to determine as a good behaviorist
was whether the person who was suffering
was suffering because they were ill in
the strictly physiological sense or
whether they were suffering from the
cumulative micro and macro catastrophes
of
Life the probability that tossing an
anti-depressant into the mix is all of a
sudden going to fix your life that are
absolutely catastrophically out of order
is zero the more unstable your life is
the less serotonin your brain produces
and that makes you hyp sensitive to
negative emotion and suppresses positive
emotion you take the problem I'm
suffering and then you think well why
are you suffering it's exposure therapy
and then you can practice encountering
the obstacles that are stopping you and
it'll make you braver and it'll help you
deal with your problems voluntary
confrontation with the forces of
darkness and chaos is the fundamental
story of
[Music]
Life yeah well n foresaw that directly
right claiming that millions of people
would die in consequence of the rise of
replacement ideologies let's say you
know in this this death of God
idea although
n in some ways pronounced that as a
novel occurrence you know once in human
history occurrence that's not true so
mer elata who's perhaps the world's
greatest historian of religions has
documented this occurrence repetitively
throughout history it's a recurring
theme the collapse of the highest
unifying order it's what destroys
cultures they lose faith in their own
presuppositions and and can't undertake
the effort necessary to sustain
themselves in consequence this is so old
it's the oldest story we know that we
have is called the enuma Elish and it's
a Mesopotamian creation myth and it's
part of a collection of myths that
emerged around the same time as the
Genesis story did and and has many of
the same narrative themes you mentioned
this in your chat with
Elon yeah well one of the one of the
insistences in that story is that um
careless and fractious sub deities
that's a good way of thinking about it
you could think about them as
motivational States or emotional states
powerful driving forces if they are
careless and
disintegrated um and they lack reverence
they kill the principle upon which
they're founded and attempt to live on
its corpse like that's that's a direct
pronouncement in the inum milish it's
one of the major plot lines and it's the
prod droma to the return of the goddess
of chaos fundamentally who returns in
that
story iritated beyond belief that her
consort her orderly consort has been
carelessly dispensed with and determined
to produce something akin to the flood
of Noah that's another good analog this
is a very old this a very old problem
the idea that there is a central
unifying theme that has to be attended
to and followed by people who want to
organize themselves psychologically and
socially and then if that's treated
improper ly that would be lack of
respect for your mother and father let's
say from a Commandments perspective or
irreverence with regards to the highest
value that there's a pattern to the
cataclysm uh that that follows in the
wake of that and you know it's
surprising to me in some ways that
that's not more widely known because
ilad wasn't an unknown thinker and he
documented this
extraordinarily carefully you know I
talked to Camille pelia about this this
at one point she said something that I
found quite
striking so I had familiarized myself
with the work of a gentleman named Eric
nyman nyman was Carl Jung's greatest
student which is really saying quite
something and he wrote two very profound
books one called the great mother which
is a study of the symbolism of chaos
that's a good way of thinking of
productive chaos it's a study the
symbolism of productive chaos and
another book called the in history of
Consciousness which is an elaboration of
the hero myth although much deeper than
the sort of treatments say Meed out to
that by Joseph Campbell and Pia said
straightforwardly that had the
academy the literary critics in
particular turned to noyman eliada Yung
instead of dareda and Fuko
that the entire
intellectual history of the last 50
years would be profoundly different and
we wouldn't be in the culture war that
we're in now now that was very striking
to me because she was the only person
that I had come across who was a very
astute literary critic who knew neyman's
work deeply and the associated works
that surrounded including elad's work
but we know that Joseph Campbell's work
for example had quite a cultural effect
and I would say one that's been at least
to some degree reunifying you know and
all of that work exists in
contradistinction to the postmodern
insistence that there's no higher order
narrative because that's the fundamental
claim of postmodernism right is there
there's no unifying meta narrative and
that's that's another reflection of this
idea of the death of God well I mean to
be to be fair though to that movement
right it was critiques of the middlemen
wielding narratives in unclear unjust or
unilateral ways so when you when you
hold out the monad you're like there
there is some ultimate unifying ordering
truth or principle by which we should
all come together perhaps right perhaps
super super interesting point of inquiry
but the trick is the priest clause and
who gets to position themselves as
privileged or preferred intermediaries
well because those guys haven't always
done a great job well see that dynamic
in the gospels MH well because the the
part of the underlying structure of the
passion story is the persecution and
then crucifixion of Christ at the hands
of
really there are more actors but three
of the central actors are the class of
Pharisees scribes and lawyers and the
Pharisees are religious Hypocrites and
they they're exactly the ones who employ
the idea of a higher order value to do
nothing but further their own status and
power right and Christ criticizes the
Pharisees constantly pointing out that
their religious devotion so to speak did
absolutely nothing at all except provide
for them the highest positions of status
and power the scribes as far as I can
tell in the biblical narrative are akin
to the modern academics who attempt to
substitute intellectual inquiry inquiry
for what would you say for exploration
and reverence that's a good way of
thinking about it lawyers yeah yeah
exactly and well and they're also
self-serving but they're they're self-
serving in a more luciferian manner I
would say because the proclivity of the
Pharisees is to use the religious
Enterprise to Foster their own their own
social status the proclivity of the of
the intellectual scribe types is to
place their own intellect worship of
their own intellect in the highest
possible position then you have the
lawyers and they're the ones who use
legalism again in the service of their
own narrow and self-focused ends and so
that postmodern dilemma that you point
to which is the proclivity of
the Sacred Enterprise to be captured by
the power Seekers that's also a very
that's an also a very ancient problem
you see that in ancient Egyptian
mythology for example so the figure of
Seth who's the evil brother of the king
is the luciferian figure that's always
the shadow of the he like L proper
Authority yeah exactly or or like
Lucifer mephistophiles and the idea
there it's a valid idea obviously is
that as you produce a sociological
hierarchy say on the on the masculine
side the so-called patriarchy is that
some of that's going to be valid and
Rule as a consequence of authority and
ability but some of it's going to
devolve into a power game the problem as
far as I can tell with the
postmodernists one of many is that they
concluded that there was no other game
than power and that's an unbelievably
dangerous presumption I me you can
understand its logic you laid it out to
some degree there's no shortage of
corruption wherever you look inside and
out but that doesn't mean that
everything is corrupt and it also
doesn't mean that power is the
fundamental principle that should unite
everything and of course the question
emerges and you are exploring this in
your book if it's if it's not nothing
nihilism and disunity and it's not power
compulsion and force then what should be
at the Pinnacle and that's a well that's
the fundamental question yeah I mean
hopefully it's it's nosis hopefully it's
it's direct connection to that which is
greater than our knowing and and and a
submission to that but a but a willing
submission with autonomy not mediated by
corruptible middlemen so you were
speaking you know bring bring all of
this down because this also sounds very
abrahamic to me like you you feel like
you're sourcing from the Old
Testament code-based right deference to
unifying power Authority and I'm more
curious about the New Testament so for
instance like just recently let's just
bring it down for listeners right
recently Louisiana I think maybe
Tennessee but definitely Louisiana has
talked about mandating ten
commandments classrooms things like that
and there's a whole you know chunk of
America that feels like yes that is an
important return to definitive values
right versus this Choose Your Own
Adventure mishmash of whatever feels
good for me and that tends to be an
Evangelical proclivity that that that
requirement
it's kind of interesting because they're
Protestants you know it's interesting to
see that particular branch of
Christianity develop this insistence on
a return to those fundamental stated
values let's say yeah but it is super
interesting do you know um what's his
what's his name uh wrot Fantasy Land um
Fantasy Land 500 years of how America
went haywire um Kurt Anderson he he was
at Harvard uh and then and then uh he
written he did Studio 360 but he's a
he's a sort of popular intellectual
historian and he he talks about how in
some respects the southern baptist
Evangelical Pentecostal movement right
he uses the Scopes Monkey Trial as kind
of a pivot point almost became um a
pre-reformation right retrenchment of
Christian Christian faith because the
mainline Protestant faiths the Anglican
Episcopalian you know Lutheran Etc were
oriented with the North
and those faiths from the Scots Irish
you know Appalachian migrations and all
the sort of history that had led to it
became there was a sort of schism and
and the and the the Scopes Monkey Trial
was kind of that you know Evolution
versus creationism that was partly
intellectual and partly geographical yes
and basically the sort of aftershocks of
the civil warh and that was when we got
this break and that is how you have you
know what was the ugv survey it was
something like 56% of Americans believe
in demonic possession like like America
because they watch their politician
right America is a
uniquely uh profoundly faith-based Place
compared to Western Europe compared to
all these other places and characterized
by continual revivals of that Spirit
right yeah but but we go back to
Louisiana and the Ten Commandments in
The Clash why are we why are we posting
a deeply ancient quite anachronistic
almost hamurabi code level abrahamic
thing not the cmon on the mount not that
turn the other cheek and love thy
neighbor not the Blessed of the meek and
humble for they shall inherit the earth
right there is a new testament right
gospel good news that is being eclipsed
so it almost feels like the posting of
the old test of the of the Ten
Commandments these days is almost a
shibil right it's almost a a sorting
mechanism which is if you are
pre-reformation and Sam Harris talks
about this with Islam right that's his
main critique of Islam is they never
went through a Reformation right so
you've got medieval sentiments that
haven't been updated well the the danger
of that I suppose is the reduction of
morality to abiding by a code so okay so
so let's take that apart a little bit I
mean I have some sympathy for the
literalism of the Protestants even in so
far as that might have produced
phenomenon like the Monkey Trial that
you referred to because what the
evangelists have been concerned about
and rightly so is that an unthinking
Darwinism poses a tremendous threat to
the Integrity of the moral code that the
West is predicated on and there's
absolutely no doubt about that now what
that means about Darwinism that's a
whole other complicated question but
specifically biological Darwinism not
social Darwinism specifically biological
Darwinism yeah yeah well it because it
is very difficult to reconcile the
claims of the especially the the more
naive claims you might say of The
evolutionary biologists with the Genesis
account for example it's very difficult
thing to do and what what do what do you
mean that when you say that the naive
claims about
Genesis as hostilities with Hezbollah
continue to escalate and Rockets are
falling life in Israel has become even
more unsettled and dangerous over 60,000
Israelis remain evacuated from their
homes in Northern Israel their lives
turned upside down the increased attacks
have forced hospitals into crisis mode
surgeries and other vital procedures are
being canceled medical staff are
relocating their operations to special
fortified levels just to continue their
life life saving work many people are
trapped in bomb shelters cut off from
the essentials that we take for granted
every day food water other basic
necessities but amidst the chaos a
Beacon of Hope shines through the
International Fellowship of Christians
and Jews for over four decades they've
been Israel's unwavering Ally providing
more than just Aid they're offering a
Lifeline to those in desperate need as
we approach the one-year anniversary of
the horrific attack on October 7th the
people of Israel need our support now
more than ever now you have the unique
opportunity to join this vital mission
for just $45 that's less than the cost
of a night out you can provide an
emergency food box containing critical
Essentials for vulnerable Israelis
trapped in bomb shelters to give to the
fellowship visit Jordan forthe
fellowship.org that's Jordan forthe
fellowship.org
[Music]
well it's not as if
our biological Darwinism has cracked the
problem of
life like it's it's a theory that isn't
complete and the details of it are still
be are still being worked out and that's
very damaging often so for example you
have this is just one example you have
claims of people like Dawkins that
reproduction can be reduced to sex and
that sex can be rep reduced to the
proclivity of genetic material to
replicate itself and that has all sorts
of
metaphysical um
implications and those metaphysical
implications are very damaging they're
they promote a certain kind of hopeless
nihilism in the sense of it's just it's
all just random creation destruction no
point of purpose no te logical output
partly that and partly or or and partly
the notion that even within that were
Pawns of these massive forces that are
reducible let's say to something
approximating the desire of genes that
desire I know that's improper
terminology to replicate themselves
although if Dawkins would say that the
genes have no desire but that's not the
point because his book The Selfish Gene
what what what would you say the the the
the sense that that desire is there is
implicit in the text and so that has
very Troublesome metaphysical
implications because people can't live
in the absence of some relationship with
Transcendent meaning and they need that
meaning to help them bear the suffering
of their life without becoming
demoralized without becoming corrupt
this isn't optional no and and and I
think one of the things the new atheists
did very badly wrong was failed to take
the problem that they were addressing
with due seriousness so either either as
an existential problem you know although
Sam Harris wrestles with that to some
degree because Harris definitely
believes in the existence of something
approximating Transcendent evil right
which is a religious stance All Things
Considered
but the problem H the problem of meaning
can't just be dispensed with by
reference to something like our
deterministic relationship to a set of
selfish genes so so basically are you
saying that in in the God is dead moment
and in the rise of the new atheist and
them sort of thinking that the the
battle had been won that they neglected
to replace it with a sufficiently robust
and inspiring alternate story because
random selection random selection of
selfish genes is inadequate to guide
culture
and the human well it's also not random
there's sexual
selection Darwin concentrated on sexual
selection to a large degree although for
about a hundred years after Darwin The
evolutionary biologists tended to avoid
the con the topic of sexual selection
because it didn't fit so nicely in with
the notion of random Evolution there's
nothing bloody random about sexual
selection butterflies can detect
departures from symmetry on the part of
their Partners at one part in a Million
like their selection for beauty is by no
means accidental and it's certainly the
case that conscious Choice has selected
human morphology down to its finest
details that's not random at all now the
mutation process is random and I know
Dawkins knows perfectly well so so
you're suggesting there's a bias towards
selection of goodness truth and Beauty
for instance something along lines I
would actually say that there's likely a
selection towards something
approximating the embodiment of that
higher order Unity that we've been
speaking of so I I mean I can give you
an example of that it's not it's like
that William Blake quote Tiger Tiger
Burning Bright thy fearful symmetry
right fearful symmetry right is is
noticeable the patterns the harmonics
pythag well you can think about that
relationship to something like the hero
myth I mean you could it's certainly no
stretch of the imagination to presume
that men who embody the heroism that's
part and parcel of the hero narrative
are much more attractive to women
obviously I mean that's the basis of
every romantic adventure that adventure
story that's ever been written and so
there is something like selection bias
in the direction of the same patterns
that are portrayed in our most
fundamental narratives and none of
that's accidental and I would say that
does imply something like a relationship
between sexual selection and embodiment
of the virtues that are part of our
deepest stories because part of the
pattern of the hero is
the portrayal the embodiment of
existential courage in the face of
life's catastrophes okay so so this is
this is a beautiful Point here because
to me this this
distills your exact role in the
information and in and influence space
because we've talked about two things so
far right one was the erosion of the
monad a unifying truth y right and then
we you've also just talked about kind of
in some respects not biological
determinism but sort of the way things
are right the the the the the Chad high
testosterone heroic male being true and
just right the the natural outcome it
would be natural that women Swoon it
would be natural that he leads his
people those kind of things so you are
holding in my ex my my understanding of
your
work a deep
Western
judeo-christian and sort of
Enlightenment value space would that
feel accurate to you because and and
you're saying hey there are important
things here but how do we how do you for
instance speak these and not end up as a
battering ram in the culture wars right
not a useful idiot a useful genius right
to Christian ethn nationalism seven
Seven Kingdoms right like like like like
Jihadi for Jesus peeps yeah or or
biological determinism and and and Grist
for the-mill of the
incels right yeah so so you're speaking
language that comes from a much deeper
place but in our current moment of hot
takes right and retweets and and and
rage bait what you're saying has the
capacity to get weaponized into some
very ugly things that I well that
happens with her mythology all the time
right because it partly because it can
get fraction
I suppose part of the attraction of the
ethnonational Christian Movement that's
developing let's say on the right which
in some ways is another form of
phariseeism because it's the attempt by
The Bad actors on the
prejudiced side of the equation to
harness the power of Christianity for
their own
self-aggrandisement but there's an
attraction in that too that's deep than
that because and just base tribalism US
versus them right well that in the fact
yes definitely but that also in the fact
that compared to a dependent and
neurotic male an aggressive and
warrior-like male is attractive and so
in in so far as our culture has done
everything it could to demoralize young
men in part because of what would you
say an implicit critique of of the
oppressive patriarchy all it does is
increase the attractiveness of
aggression to the young men who are
demoralized and the Christian
nationalist types are capitalizing on
that not surprising I'm not trying to
justify it because it's a fragmented
Story I mean the the hero the archetypal
Hero has a warrior element but that
Warrior element is conjoined with an
extreme proclivity for self-sacrifice
and generous social conduct and
reciprocal altruism yes so and that's
that's an unbelievably important part of
the story now you even see this by the
way in female pornographic fantasies
because we know the landscape of female
pornographic fantasy which tends to be
literary is the object of Desire is a
man with a well-developed capacity for
Mayhem so that while the standard
character the Google Engineers mapped
this when they were looking at
pornography use online in a very good
book called a billion Wicked thoughts
the canonical hero of female pornography
is vampire werewolf pirate billionaire
surgeon yeah mad bad and dangerous to
know right but but what happens in The
Narrative is that
that monster that Beast is enticed into
a reciprocal relationship that's
permanent so there's a there's the wild
wildness and the monstrosity part of the
masculine psyche that's being portrayed
in the fantasies but then that's
something that's you could say in a way
domesticated although that's not exactly
that's not a perfect term for it but
brought into productive relationship
with well with a woman in the
pornographic fantasy but then the
broader community so there's a balance
there's a very tight balance and it's
one that women are trying to strike all
the time with in relationship to men is
they want men who are capable and and
even capable of being dangerous but they
want that encapsulated within it's the
soothing of the Savage Beast right that
there's a need to harness that kind of
that un unrestrained or unconstrained
vitalism yeah to harness it right right
right well and you see you see this you
see this in the abrahamic sto in the
Abraham story in particular because
Abraham is a
relatively sheltered and privileged
individual at the beginning of the
journey he's 70 years old when it starts
and God comes to him as the voice of
Adventure right because God tells
Abraham that if he goes out in that he's
to go out into the world to leave his
zone of
comfort right to occupy that exploratory
space that's maximally rewarding and to
expand himself in consequence and that
that's to be done in preference to the
Comfort that he already experiences
that's very interesting it's a very
interesting characterization of God and
God makes Abraham an offer basically
which I think is a an offer that's very
much worth thinking about from an
evolutionary biology
perspective God tells Abraham that if he
abides Faithfully by the spirit of
Adventure and he makes the sacrifices
necessary to transform himself in that
endeavor just as you have to change when
you take on more responsibility and more
Adventure that
four things will happen to him his life
will become a blessing to him that's a
pretty good deal and genuine blessing to
him that his name will become recognized
and admired among his peers but for
valid reasons so he's not a narcissist
or a
psychopath that he will establish
something of lasting permanence and that
he'll do that in a way that's good for
everyone else now is that is is that the
explicit Covenant you bet that's the
Covenant before he jumps before he
that's the offer that's on the table
when when the Spear of Adventure makes
itself manifest qu
quote that's well that's that's what God
tells Abraham when when he's attempting
to entice him into the adventure because
the the question that's posed in the
abrahamic story at the beginning is the
question that dovi an asked about
socialism in Notes from Underground you
know dov's critique of socialism which
was successful socialism was essentially
this he said that if you provided people
with all of the everything they needed
and wanted at hand he said so they had
nothing to do but busy themselves with
the reproduction of the species and and
the eating of cakes right so it's a
hedonistic Paradise an infantile
hedonistic Paradise is well what could
be better than that and
dov's response was that if you provided
people with nothing but that they would
smash it to bits just so that something
interesting would happen because that
there's a an impetus towards upward
moving development that overrides
everything else including the mere
satiation let's say of of material needs
that's also exemplified in the image of
Jacob's Ladder this sort of upward
extending Pathway to the Transcendent
that Jacob determines to Traverse when
he decides that he's going to change his
life well well so so he got higher and
lower you're saying that might be an
aspirational kind of Soul Urge right but
then like Bob spolsky's work at Stanford
could also just be dopamin energic
novelty seeking in the sense that we
Flatline when we're faced with
everything we do energent it is dop
energic novelty seeking because we hard
way to get the 4X return on what's new
different right so we discount current
current value so that system that you're
describing the dopamine system that's
that's an repetitive reward system and
it signifies the possibility of
consumatory reward so it's a quest
system and it's not a cognitive system
precisely because the dopaminergic
system is grounded in the hypothalamus
which is an unbelievably old part of the
brain it's right on top of the spinal
cord it's the basic motivational control
system of the entire brain and the
dopaminergic system is instantiated in
that half of the hypothalamus is
concerned with fundamental motivation
States like thirst and hunger lust
defensive aggression Etc the other half
is focused on exploratory Behavior so
and that's approach Behavior that's
movement forward and so that if you
think about that the action of that
system that dopaminergic exploratory
system that is what's instantiated in
hero mythology and it is it's a it's a
fundamental source of the kind of reward
that people really like to pursue but it
is associated with exploration and
expansion not with satiation and
consumatory reward right it's very very
different notion of reward you know when
you you said is this I can't I can't
remember precisely your wording is that
is this nothing but I know you didn't
exactly say that the action of the
dopaminergic system I would say well my
sense is that and I think we're on the
cusp of this is that we're going to see
that our theological presupposition
and our biological presuppositions are
pointing in precisely the same direction
as the Neuroscience has got more
sophisticated that's become more and
more obvious well that yes and that
feels like the sort of implicit theme of
our conversation so far right we've been
talking about the monad and we've been
talking about you know High te Heroes
right right and and so potentially right
is it that our science will finally
catch up to our philosophy and theology
or is it that we write convenient Just
So Stories to explain what is actually
being dictated and more Primal base
level beyond our Canen and beyond our
will and motivation I don't have a point
of view on that but I'm curious about it
well I don't think they convenient Just
So Stories because I think they're
they're as correct as anything can be
correct I mean let me give you an
example of that
so the the hero myth that's laid out in
the passion story
is has as part of its structure the
insistence that
there's nothing that's more
transformative than the willingness to
embrace the full horror of life right
because that's what the passion story is
it's it's it's an
archetypal it's an archetypal tragedy
taken to a metaphysical level and it's
an archetypal tragedy
because Christ technically undergo
virtually all the varieties of suffering
that are possible right okay but excepts
that right or even welcomes it which is
very strange thing but that's not where
it ends because there's a mythological
surround of image and
story that accompanies the passion that
also insists that after Christ is
crucified and died he Harrows hell and
that's something like a forthright
confrontation with the domain of
malevolence itself but the story is very
straightforward if you think about it
from a developmental perspective or a
biological perspective the story is that
there's no way that you can adapt to
life without embracing all of its
Horrors including the proclivity human
proclivity for evil and then there's an
additional addendum to that which is the
degree to which you'll be redeemed is
proportionate to the courage that you
embody in that confrontation and I think
that looks to me just to be correct so
it's not a just so story unless life
itself is a just so story because the
alternative hypothesis is that you could
adapt property to Life by shrinking from
its most aversive elements and that's
preposterous like I can't see any
circumstances at all under which you
could make a credible case that that
could possibly be true because even when
children are trying to expand their
competence let's say in a relatively
incremental manner what they're always
doing when they do that is putting
themselves on the edge of their ability
and flirting with catastrophe you know
you can do that foolishly and
dangerously and sometimes that's useful
but you can do it in a manner that's
incremental and sensible and it works
just as well so that or or even better
right I mean play is arguably just the
ability to make mistakes without fear
right that that's that's what all
animals do all mammals do wolves do it
kids do it and if right and that might
be also the highest form of Engagement
well and and and volitional Novelty
generation so rather than just faceless
formless pointless Evolution creation
destruction right when volition when
Free Will comes into the mix we get to
create new we get to create we we get to
explore the adjacent
possible attention men who still believe
in the American dream in a world gone
mad the Precision five from Jeremy's
razor stands as a beacon of Sanity five
Blades of superior engineering offer a
shave as unshakable as your faith that
the nation's best days still lie ahead
experience an exceptionally smooth
remarkably close shave and a testament
to the fact that Merit still matters
stop giving your money to woke
corporations that hate you get Jeremy
risers Precision 5 instead available now
at Jeremy rers.us
[Music]
what's implied and stewardship that's
what's implied in the initial Genesis
narrative when when there's an
insistence that we we first see God
characterized as the creator of all
things and then we see human beings
characterized as made in the image of
God which obviously implies
some lower
resolution embodiment of that creative
capacity and that seems to me to be
perfectly accurate and I do think that
that's that as good a definition of what
Consciousness constitutes as anything
that's ever been described I mean we are
playing constantly we play with the
possibility that's in front of us
exactly the same way that the God God In
the initial phases of the Genesis story
plays with the dohu vabo which is the
chaotic possibility out of which reality
itself emerges and there's a perfect
isomorphism there and as far as I'm
concerned you can map
that we have mapped that
neuropsychologically I mean the further
reaches of that exploration haven't been
integrated completely into the culture
yet but it's there so so then you get
sort of Stuart Bran's whole earth
catalog bit about like we are as Gods we
may as well get good at it so how do you
say isomorphically we are the same we
are made in the image of and we are sort
of doing another version of that and how
does that not end up in narcissistic
inflationism that's a great question but
that's also the first question that's
dealt with one of the first questions
that's dealt with in the opening
chapters of of Genesis because God lays
down an injunction to Adam and Eve which
is a very specific injunction he says
you're he basically tells the first two
human beings that they have full freedom
in the garden to interact with
everything that's there to name it to to
Steward it to utilize it but they're not
to eat of the fruit of the tree of the
knowledge of Good and Evil and what that
means is that they're to abide by the
implicit moral order and not pridefully
replace it and that's exactly see this
is the mistake nche made because nche
n's medicament for the death of God was
that human beings would have to create
their own values and that's the one
thing that God tells Adam and Eve
they're not to do in the garden and the
notion is it's fairly straightforward
and this is something that Sam Harris
has some appreciation for although not
religiously is that there is an implicit
moral order and that has to be follow it
it can't be replaced by the presumptions
of human beings that's partly what Eve
does when she sins is attempt to do that
but you but you you know elain pagle's
work and and her her translations of the
nagadi Scrolls and then the Gnostic
Gospels won the national book award
right I mean that book blew my mind when
I read it in grad school because at that
very moment in the Genesis story right
in one of the apocryphal gospels at the
moment that Yahweh is bowing up on Adam
and Eve and saying and who allowed you
to eat from the fruit of the tree of
Good and Evil right that exact moment in
booms
Sophia right the mother of all says and
who made you a yat demi urge false maker
and why are you flexing on your children
yeah well that's the Gnostic
interpretation you know and I would say
that's actually as far as I'm concerned
that's part of the flaw in pel's work is
that proclivity towards gnosticism
because there's a reason that that
original Demi urge let's say lays down
the law and the reason for that is that
there is a implicit moral order and you
know you touch on that in your book in
one part in particular when you talk
about the infinite game yes this is
another way yeah well this is another
way of conceptualizing the implicit
moral order let's say is that
and so for example if you and I only
interact once and I have the chance to
take advantage of you for
me there's You could argue in a sense
that there's every reason for me to do
that but and so that in any one-off
interaction you could say that the
appropriate default position if you're
cold and calculating about it is to take
advantage of your advantage to to
utilize power and compulsion Game Theory
when I want yeah exact okay but you know
perfectly well that that rule doesn't
apply to iterated games so we're going
to interact with each other repeatedly
especially when that's open-ended what
you get in that situation is the
emergence of a whole different set of of
The Guiding principles that allow the
interactions to continue so the notion
would be yeah to keep playing the game
for as long as possible and include as
many players as possible right right and
and to have all the players actually
playing which means that they can't be
subject to compulsion or Force because
one of the Yak PP for example has
documented he's done the best work by a
large margin on the neurobiology of play
PP has showed quite clearly that that
state of play which is a highly
desirable State and an expansive state
is also relatively um It's relatively
fragile in that it can be disrupted by
the emergence of any other motivational
State and so and the outcome has to be
uncertain for it to be fun right for it
to actually be a game and not just a
beat down
it has to be uncertain and there has to
there's it's more than just uncertainty
there it has to be
uncertain and the consequence of playing
the game has to be the expansion of
skill not only at that game but on in
Associated games right which is why if
you're if you're picking someone to play
with you don't pick someone that you can
just easily defeat which you know if
Victory or power was the name of the
game you'd pick someone or you know kids
playing basketball or touch football
right when the Big Brothers you know
have enroll the younger brothers and
they get their butts kicked and they're
like all right it's three on five or
okay we'll spot you one points or
whatever will be to make the outcome
uncertain right well uncertain and
challenging yeah right right so we can
all play full out and not know how it's
going to turn out yes you that yes
because you want that to be a
consequence of the game and it's very
interesting to see and it's very
interesting to Think Through the fact
that if children have a choice if
they're even remotely well socialized
they'll pick a fair and challenging game
over certain Victory yes well as far as
I'm concerned that mere fact alone does
irreparable damage to the hypothesis
that the fundamental motivating force in
human endeavor is power because if it
was power you'd pick the easy Victory
every time like why wouldn't you because
anybody that you can crush is in your
control that isn't how that's not a game
no one wants to play that game not even
the Victor unless they're
narcissistically Psychopathic and
immature and so so it's so interesting
because in in a free choice situation
children and adults as well will pick a
game of optimized challenge over a game
of certain Victory and I think that you
can you
can expand on that you can make that a
general principle of motivation this is
exactly the choice that Abraham makes
our two golden retrievers do that we
have a young puppy who's giant 90 PBS
and and and his big sister who's only 60
lb and he started being a bully and she
stopped playing and then now all he ever
does is flop over and play the
submissive to her so they get to play
right so they've evened it out right
right right right exactly and you can
see that as pep showed mammals in
general seem to have a specialized play
circuit and it is regulated by precisely
that so one of the things he
demonstrated which was Nobel Prize
worthy as far as I'm concerned because
it was a remarkable Discovery was is
that if you pair juvenile male rats
together in repeated bouts the dominant
rat so that would be the one has a 10%
weight Advantage because that's enough
to allow a rat to reliably pin its
opponent which is what they like to do
in their wrestling bouts if the larger
rat doesn't let the smaller rat win at
least onethird of the time the smaller
rat stops inviting play about and so I
mean people didn't understand the
significance of that the significance of
that is that there's an implicit
morality that emerges in consequence of
repeated voluntary play like that's a
major league Discovery and that's part
of that implicit moral order say say
that sentence again please that there's
an there's a morality that emerges in
consequence of iterated voluntary play
and it's patterned yeah so this also
makes completely short shrift of any
arguments about something approximating
moral relativism it's like no wrong why
because the constraints that exist in a
in the domain of desirable repeated
iterated play are it's a very narrow
it's a straight and narrow path it's a
very difficult path to Traverse this is
what you're trying to teach kids when
you socialize them between the ages of
two and four because at two they're
still
basically narrowly egocentric impulsive
based yeah they want they want what they
they want whatever it is they want to be
granted now regardless of consequences
for themselves and the future other
people that's yeah Maria Mont M that you
goes from Individual you know basically
acquisitive play to then parallel play
we'll be doing our things beside each
other collaborative play and then
potentially to competitive play right
like once we've got collabor
collaborative because you have to abide
by the
rules right let's up the anti and make
this more fun mhm right exactly right so
that's actually that competitive play is
actually an intensification of
cooperative play right because you set
out the rules are you suggesting that
just baked into take your pick it could
be aen it could be primate whatever but
some level of our existence there is an
implicit desire for fairness for
reciprocity and for some other what you
would be calling in this instance a
moral director it is the moral Direction
I I mean you see that you see that in
conversation I mean because what happens
in a conversation is that each person
makes an offering and the goal of the
offering is mutual expansion of
apprehension but also desire to continue
the interaction well that's that's very
tightly bounded so I I can give you an
example of that so we ran a seminar this
works with any seminar you only need in
a seminar you only need one person who's
playing a power game to bring the
seminar to a Hulk yes right so you have
a in the punch bowl man it only takes
one absolutely absolutely so the rule
for a seminar should be well here's the
question we're trying to address and
then you offer your suggestions as to a
solution and I listen and I offer mine
and we allow those ideas to wrestle with
one another hopefully aiming at
something like a synthesis and you're
not doing that because you want to
appear smart or dominant you're not
doing it for some reason other than the
direction of the conversation and
everybody in the circle is playing that
same game and then you get an incredibly
productive conversation that's a logos
centered conversation so you know that
emergent logos lies in truth in truth in
word well in it's Redemptive truth you
know Christ said in the gospels that
wherever two or more were gathered in
his name he was there well that's what
that means and all all the valid members
of the psychotherapeutic Community
understand this even from a scientific
perspective because one of the things
Carl Rogers probably did more to detail
this than any other great therapist his
notion and Freud's as well um was that
untrammeled
communication oriented towards something
like Improvement was Redemptive and it
was healing and that's exactly right
Charles limb did work at Hopkins on MRIs
with jazz musicians Keith soy who's done
stuff at uh see Chapel Hill on group
flow right the the emergence of
something that can only be presented as
We Gather right right well you see
musicians doing that all the time for
sure Jazz Steph Curry basketball you
know comebacks you know Patriots in the
Super Bowl there are those emergent
moments where there is a co-creative
emergence that supersedes anything that
anybody else singularly brought to the
table right right right and your point
is that you can mark that
electrophysiologically well that that it
has neurophysiological correlates for
sure chickens and eggs TBD yeah sure and
that and and the interesting way this
was one of uh Keith soy's students but
they then went to prove that you know
let's say a the autotelic nature the
self-driving motivational nature of
these things you get like you know 100
points if you do it by yourself but you
get 300 points if you do it in
conjunction with others it it is three
times more rewarding to co-create that
experience than is to have it in
isolation in today's chaotic World many
of us are searching for a way to aim
higher and find spiritual peace but
here's the thing prayer the most common
tool we have isn't just about saying
whatever comes to mind it's a skill that
needs to be developed that's where
hallow comes in as the number one prayer
and meditation app hallow is launching
an exceptional new series called how to
pray imagine learning how to use
scripture as a Launchpad for profound
conversations with God how to properly
enter into imaginative prayer and how to
incorporate prayers reaching far back in
church history this is isn't your
average guided meditation it's a
comprehensive two-e Journey Into the
Heart of prayer led by some of the most
respected spiritual leaders of our time
from guests including Bishop Robert
Baron father Mike schmidtz and Jonathan
roomy known for his role as Jesus in the
hit series The Chosen you'll discover
prayer techniques that have stood the
test of time while equipping yourself
with the tools needed to face life's
challenges with renewed strength ready
to revolutionize your prayer life you
can check out the new series as well as
an extensive catalog of prayers when you
download the hall app just go to
hall.com Jordan and download the hall
app today for an exclusive 3-month trial
that's hall.com Jordan elevate your
prayer life
today yeah well that's probably that's
probably an indication of something like
the relative payoff because it's
definitely the case this is partly too
why the injunction to love your enemies
is necessary because the biggest pay
payoff you're going to get from a
genuine discussion is one that you have
with someone whose views are maximally
different than your own but who is
playing an honest communicative game yes
you know and so why is that an enemy
well you you you tend to presume that
anybody who varies in their fundamental
presumptions from you is on the other
side of the fence but they're also the
people that have the most to offer if
they're playing a straight game yes and
so well can we try that well hopefully
we're doing that at least as much as we
can yeah well I was thinking about that
you know cuz there was a fair amount of
travel I came down out of the mountains
yesterday you know it's a bit bit of a
pilgrimage to come up here I was
thinking of every person who's ever
asked me about your work my thoughts on
it me tracking it us getting to see you
when I was with Adrien grer and when you
came to Austin and getting to that was a
crazy experience by the way even just
walking to that Stadium at
UT the the throngs of people convening
on that stadium and the way everyone was
holding themselves the way they were
walking down the streets stopping
together there there were so many
couples there were men all the young men
were wearing Blazers the women were
wearing floral long skirts I said what
the hell is going on here is this is
this double scheduled with prom is
graduation happening I they literally
that Vibe and I and and the last time i'
had been to that stadium and seen
anything like that that just that amount
of kind of magnetic drawer was when John
Mayer and the Greatful Dead had played
there so so so I was like what on Earth
is about to happen happened and we went
into the stadium and you launched into a
very professorial opening it was it was
n it was young it was all these things
and I could sense the kind of Texas
crowd not necessarily having their
footing and it wasn't until you shifted
into the C and Abel story that you could
feel a palpable drop and all of these
wonderful Texans who had been gathered
were like ah it's Sunday school we're
going to get a Bible story right right
right and so speaking of you know the
infinite which if anybody's curious
that's James C's concept of finite and
infinite games finite games are win-
lose right and have a Victor and and a
victim and infinite games are win-win
right friendship is an infinite game for
sure and and you know and I'm sure
you've seen the study on like dark Triad
folks on both sides of the political
Spectrum right that that fundamentally
anybody in the moderate middle the sort
of 90% middle don't test don't score for
dark Triad narcissism melanism
sociopathy or authoritarianism but
sadism I know they've added that one so
that bet they had to add it because it
was lurking at the edges totally just
the idea you get off on doing those
shitty things um but that 5% on the far
left and 5% on the far right do score
off the charts for those yeah and then
you you map that with Triston Harris's
research right the center for Humane
Tech those guys that 90% of all social
media is governed by 10% of posters so
you break those that 10% in half and
You' got the Triad folks the 5% and 5%
posting 90% of what we see and believe
each other are about absolutely well
that's that's a much better way of
construing the political landscape than
the political uh manner of construal
like the a large part of the pathology
of the culture war is actually the
parasitic Predators on the edges um what
would you say massive amplification
algorithmic amplification yeah and the
protection of anonymity right that's
really bad and so you've got Silicon
Valley business interest amplifying it
algorithmically to sell ads yeah but
you've also got bad International actors
oh yeah you've got North Iran Russ Russ
and China all looking to crack the
edifice of this liberal Democratic
experiment yeah so yeah enabling the
Psychopaths that's a good way to do it
right yeah you bet so so so the the the
risk I'd like to take and ask you which
is my experiences is that you are taking
a stand
for the most deeply Western traditional
expression of the infinite game and
you're saying don't throw babies out
with bathwater there's something
profoundly valuable here in both the
judeo-christian spiritual tradition
theological tradition as well as the
emergence of Western liberalism yeah
right because that that's your whole
hyperallergic reaction to stalinism
right you're saying there's something
precious here and it is under threat
from all sides it's under threat from
precisely the o that you describe most
and you're taking a stand for the
infinite game but you are becoming a
weaponized battering ram for Christian
eth nationalists playing the finite game
so can you never mind the woke social
justice folks they can't organize their
way out of a goddamn paper bag I in in
this at this moment they are not
actually a threat they're a pain in the
ass but they're not a
threat militant Christian ethn
nationalism being inflamed by Putin
right KGB St continuation of the Stalin
lineage being undermined and eroded by
Christianity like if you could police
your own side of the culture War more
and call those Folks up to truly
Christian values not weaponized ethn
nationalism then you would unlock
something in the culture War debates
that we're not getting when you get
positioned the audience capture and Echo
Chambers as just beating on well people
have tried to throw be in with that lot
fairly regularly over the last 10 years
and it hasn't been very successful I
mean I I would say a lot of the activity
on that front right now has been coming
out
of what would you say the Nick Fuente's
crowd online and all the people who are
associated with that you know absolutely
pathological movement and tenant media
right they've just gone
yeah yeah well so so what does that
imply um well there's the it implies
that the pheric danger is always with us
which is
that the the the highest possible
virtues can be weaponized by the worst
possible actors in fact that's exactly
what they'll do I mean one of the things
you see for example with the dark tetrad
types is that their one of their
employees is victimization so yes either
either I'm special or I'm vulnerable or
I'm rightous or then I'm vindictive like
it's it's a Cascade yeah yeah but
they're they're extremely good at
they're extremely good by temperament at
playing the victim card yes and so
that's and it's an extraordinarily
effective Ploy when you're dealing with
conscientious people because you can
make them feel guilty or agreeable
people because you can make them feel
sorry for you and so that kind of covers
the political Spectrum you Capt the
Psychopaths capture the Liberals with
with agreeableness and they capture the
conservatives with conscientiousness
because they tell the conservatives well
you know you're more racist you're more
prejudiced you're more sexist than you
should be and they try to guilt them
into that yeah they use guilt yeah they
use empathy for the for the left and
they use guilt for the right oh and the
agreeableness is on the part of the
audience like I play the victim so I'm
agreeable so I'm going to try and help
you absolutely absolutely and it's it's
particularly easy to capture women in
that matter because they tend to be more
agreeable so they're much more
susceptible to victimization PLO and
it's not surprising I mean because women
are in a very complicated situation
because when they have infants at least
for the first eight months of the
infant's life they have to be 100%
empathic and so you have to be able to
you have to be able to do that now the
problem with having an orientation to
the world that's fundamentally
predicated on empathy is that the
Psychopaths can game it yes and I mean
that is the fundamental problem is also
why we know for example that young women
are much more susceptible to the
blandishments of the dark tetrad types
because they can be manipulated in
consequence of their empathy and they
don't have the worldly experience to
tell the difference between people who
are in trouble and people who use claims
that they're in trouble to do nothing
but manipulate and this is a massive
like the problem that you laid out of
the dark tet actors let's say on both
side of the spectrum these are this is a
civilization challenging problem it's
not some side effect of the culture wars
it's like
whenever Society is in a situation where
the dark tetr types get the upper hand
everything is gone they demolish
everything arthor Brooks wrote about
this I think in the Atlantic a few a few
months ago but it was sort of one in 14
one in 14 people are testing that way so
if you got just a group of 30 you've got
two in that crowd that are likely it's a
Continuum right and given the social
norms these days let's just say sort of
educated you know knowledge worker
economy types right we're all trained in
nonviolent communication everybody's
voice has an opinion there's no bad
ideas right there's a very flat
egalitarian sort of social space we we
there that's right there's no
intervening hierarchies so actually call
that early and stop it when some when
when when a dark tetr person is playing
those Gambit yeah you seem like the
authoritarian yeah right but he
kind of be like no no not my first rodeo
I've seen this before and we're nipping
this in the bud because like you said it
only takes one person at the seminar to
quer the deal so I watched Mark
Zuckerberg at Congress and you know he's
a kind of a convenient Whipping Boy
let's say for the conservatives and you
know no doubt he's made his errors and
some of those he's publicly admitted
although I have some sympathy for him
because my suspicions are that the
typical person including the typical
corporate magnet when they're approached
by high order governmental agencies and
asked to comply because of reasons of
National Security especially 5 years ago
would have listened you know you might
think you're the one person who would
have withstood that pressure but it's
like I don't think so and asking Mark to
do that I think that's too much to ask
for someone especially under those
circumstances because he didn't
understand the full extent of his social
media Enterprise or how to regulate it
and he certainly didn't understand that
he was being asked to do corrupt things
by a government that was hellbent on a
certain form of censorship having said
all that it's not like we know how to
deal with this we have these new
communication Technologies Facebook and
Instagram and Tik Tok and x and the
narcissistic Psychopaths have free reign
and that's embedded by their anonymity
and by the algorithmic expansion of
their of their troublemaking but it's
not like anyone knows what to do about
that right because when you tilt towards
control well then you have the problem
of the suppression of free speech which
is a real problem like that's not
trivial and if you just let there be a
free for- all well then the Bad
actors have a disproportionate effect
and we don't know what to do about that
like one of the things I've thought
through for what it's worth is that I
think it's a big mistake to put the
anonymous people with the real people
you mean like trolls or just faceless
accounts like B faceless I think that
social media networks should separate
the faceless accounts from the verified
identities well it blows out you blows
out millions of years of primate
reciprocity in
tribal yes and that actually turns out
to be quite a problem right if I can't
hold you accountable in any manner for
what you do all that does is precisely
what it does say it to my face right
right well well people are much more
civilized face to face for exactly those
reasons all those mechanisms kick in I
mean we know we know perfectly well this
is actually valid social psychological
research if you anonymize Ordinary
People the worst sides of their
character come forward and like a lot of
what regulates us is that implicit
require M signified even by facial
expression in face to-face contact
that's indicative of the desire for
reciprocity there have been studies on
that with dating apps right that people
are ghosting and doing all sorts of
atrocious behaviors to each other on
Tinder because it's a random dating pool
of of data points in the past I went on
a date with you because you were my best
friend sister or we met at church or
there was something in our neighborhood
or region and and relational networks
and I didn't want to pee in that pool
yes precisely well versus just Swip for
another one it's also the case see we
also overestimate the degree to which
moral control is internalized you know
we like to think that she's back to n we
like to think that if we're good people
it's because we control ourselves it's
like that's not right really it it it's
more subtle than that there's some of
that that's correct in that people do
have a conscience and sometimes abide by
it but the reason that the typical good
person is good is because they're
socialized enough to be so socially
acceptable or even desirable and what
that means is that a ring of people
surround them constantly and that means
they can Outsource the problem of the
regulation of their behavior to the
crowd so for example while you and I are
talking it's but it's an exter instead
of the super ego because while I'm
talking to you for example I'm watching
your eyes I'm watching your face you're
signaling to me constantly whether
you're still engaged in the conversation
whether you're thinking of something
else if we're were turn-taking properly
and if I'm attentive and you're there
then I can use those momentto moment
operations or observations to regulate
my behavior that's not internal right
it's a dynamic that's playing out
between us and much of the manner with
with mirror neurons and micro muscles of
the face and affect and posture and and
B things all all of that right it's
deeply mirrored right and so the upshot
of that is that I don't have to
undertake a tremendous amount of the
complex problem of regulating my own
behavior as long as people can stand
having me around because they'll do that
for me and all I have to do is pay
attention and so we do Outsource a lot
of moral regulation to the community and
that's fine but what it does imply is
that so you're suggesting that's sort of
voty and Scaffolding of our of our good
behavior is is each other and and well
it's also part of the demand of course
it's partly the demand for the
continuation let's say of the infinite
game you know I mean if I have a friend
and I'm a kid and I'm playing one-on-one
basketball with him you could say that
each basketball bout is a finite game in
that I could win it or lose it but the
Friendship at least in part could be a
sequence of those games and the rule for
a sequence is something more like well
try being a good sport and fun to play
with which is a well that's way
different than win right it includes
winning because if I if we're going to
play I would like you to try to win
because part of being a good sport is
playing full out ex exactly exactly in a
fair game in a fair game and the fair
part of it is a nod to that higher order
morality that's part of say an infinite
game rather than a finite game but but
all of that's embedded and embodied in
all of our social communicative
practices all the time the psychopathic
types and the narcissistic types they
just use that to manipulate right not
using it to play a finite game and or to
play an infinite game and this is
interesting too they use which bit well
they whatever information they derive
from the social interaction they just
put to their own self- serving purposes
right they're just using it to
facilitate manipulation and you might
ask this is a perfectly good question
well why not do that this is why people
like Andrew Tate are attractive let's
say to the incel crowd it's like if I
can manipulate you and I can get what I
want then why the hell shouldn't I do it
that's just Will To Power 101 yeah
precisely why shouldn't I take advantage
of that why shouldn't I lie and cheat
and steal if that if it means I get my
way well part of the answer to that is
well that might work momentarily but
you're also playing an infinite game
with yourself and we know perfectly well
that the the typical outcome of the
psychopathic pattern of interaction is
negative for the psychopath himself
they're incapable of learning from
experience for example so they repeat
their errors they don't they don't
modify their own behavior and so if
you're a psychopath and a narcissist and
MCU valan you can optimize
certain forms of short-term return but
it's a really bad medium to long-term
game so even even if you don't include
other people in the purview of your
moral
sentiment if you're a psychopath you
dispense with your future self that's
why so many of them end up in prison
well okay so so you probably know these
stats stone cold but right so so large
numbers of psychopaths end up in prison
than also what one in three fortune
th000 CEOs are at I doubt that but doubt
it yeah no I don't believe that I don't
believe that I think that's overblown
and I think there's a lot of implicit
leftist anti- capitalist idiocy in those
studies that doesn't mean there aren't
plenty of Mack of ellan people some of
whom occupy positions of power but the
problem is it's not
a to become you know this you know this
to become successful in any Enterprise
that iterates you can't screw people
over not very well cuz they remember and
people have evolved modules for
remembering cheaters like we're very
good at remembering cheaters and so most
people who are engaged in reciprocal
complex reciprocal social interactions
can't be Psychopathic because they get
caught so now can I can I ask you a
question on the on the capitalist thing
that you just men yeah because i' I've
heard you say a couple of things in I
don't know however long the last couple
of years one was I think it might have
been in your conversation with Elon
talking about any uh sort of neom mouth
Fusion we've got too many people
question right and that being sort of
what you were describing as sociopathic
and then something along the lines
of capitalism and individual achievement
attainment right being a noble and
virtuous good right and therefore you
know High net worth Coos billionaires
Etc should be valorized you know not not
kneecapped right which in reading of you
I took to be sort of against tless poppy
gets whacked socialism right you're
saying hey you have to you have to
preserve space and valorize Humanity we
can't hate ourselves right that on the
population question and if there is
somebody who is ingenious creative you
know bringing value to society they
shouldn't be kneecapped or you know
regressive ta you put them in positions
where you can exploit them no I'm
serious this is the reason for
meritocracy in places like Harvard you
know because the reverse view is well um
Everybody deserves a chance let's say
and look it's not like there's nothing
to be said about that but it isn't that
we're awarding positions at
Harvard because we're benefiting the
people who get the positions that
happens that's not the reason the reason
we pick the smartest and most competent
possible people we can to educate deeply
is so that everybody else can benefit
from their ability that's the reason the
reason for meritocracy isn't to reward
the meritocratic that's necessary
because otherwise they'll stop being
productive but you know you know there's
a predo distribution in terms of
productivity and the predo distribution
is a vicious game the square root of the
number of people in an Endeavor do half
the work so if you have 10,000 employees
doing one thing a hundred of them do
half the work it's like you want to
reward those hundred because
the whole 10,000 and then beyond depend
on them and so you need to tilt Society
in the direction of rewarding the kind
of behavior that's a broad benefit now
it's going to benefit the individuals as
well yes so so so can I posee to you a
thought experiment he your answer okay
so um in hearing that right
fundamentally like pro- free market pro-
individual accumulation of wealth and
pro kind of a progressive expansion of
humanity population Etc both let's just
wind back the clock way back machine to
like 1970 and because that that's a good
inflection point or like you know 70 to
73 you've got Freeman Doctrine right
that's what that that's when um Freeman
first rights sole responsibility of
Corporations a shareholder profit that's
when you've got uh Club of Rome saying
hey we can't you know infinite growth on
a finite Planet we're going to cook this
thing right you get Paul erick's
population bomb right you get those
famous bets you get so you basically get
those two arguments you get are we are
there too many of us and or is there too
much of an lopsided distribution of
profits and and and wealth yeah right
now at that time when those arguments
were they weren't they weren't new at
the time but let's just say they were
distilled at that time you had a 30 to1
CEO to average worker pay ratio now it's
over 300 yeah right so that's a big
difference that's a 10x that's an order
of magnitude change is that argument
still true and if so for how much longer
and when you and I were born there were
half the humans on this earth right and
that was a question that again that was
that that was the early stuff that was
the club of Rome stuff we since had the
Green Revolution and most economists
would agree that four billion of us
pretty much half of the world's
population is only here because of
synthetic NPK fertilizers glyphosate
Roundup you know basically just
industrial chemical petrochemical over
you know hyperproduction of food stuff
so if it was true in 1970s and and I
because philosophic I'm aligned with you
right I I that whole kneecapping weak
affirmative action tallest poppy stuff
right and and spiteful um taking from
those who have thrived or succeeded
that's kind of ir ran 101 right but it
was true in 1970 but the landscape was
massively changed when and when and how
or if do we ever need to update those
arguments and and re revise them in
light of current events and growth codes
well I would say the answer to the
problem problem of hyper privilege on
the economic side there's a gospel's
answer to that which
is
from much will be asked from those to
whom much has been given but that's
trickle that that George W HW said that
right trickle down economics feels a lot
like getting pissed on well I'm not I'm
not speaking even of it from an economic
perspective I'm I'm saying that the
problem of unequal distribution of
opportunity and wealth is a pervasive
and Universal problem it's not
attributable first of all to capitalism
which makes Marx for example a weak
critic of the predo distribution problem
because the predo distribution problem
characterizes all sorts of systems that
have nothing to do with capitalism so so
you can't attribute the accumulation of
wealth per se or privilege for that
matter to capitalism that's that's a
dead argument that doesn't mean that the
accumulation of Goods in the hands of
fewer and fewer people isn't a problem
it's a major problem the question is how
you address it now it doesn't appear to
me at all that you can address it using
something like left-wing economic a
leftwing economic approach not in its
more radical phases no but techn
philanthropy sucks too right The Gates
Foundation malaria Nets in Africa are
all getting used to fish in Lake
tanganika you know and well it's hard to
do good that's part of the that's part
of the problem that it's actually very
hard to do good you know and and it's I
suppose Al it's also the part of the
problem of the conundrum of wealth is
once you acrew wealth and you want to do
good with it does that mean that you
know how to do good and the answer is no
it's really difficult well and just just
because you got lucky with PCS in the
90s does that does that mean you can
solve wild hunger or or or
epidemiological challenges or anything
else right that there's a right there's
a removal well that's the problem of
gigantism right you're trying to operate
your experiments on too broad a scale
and it's also the problem of UN ended
consequences as you pointed out you know
the use of malaria Nets to fish for
example which no one predicted and you
know the way that we've what we've
evolved to deal with those sorts of
problems is something like smallscale
experiments designed to determine the
consequences of a given course of action
before they're ramped up into huge
sociological experiments I mean it's
it's it was a Dawning realization in the
social science Community probably
started in the 1930s and it never got to
be as pervasive as it should have been
that whenever you implement any policy
whatsoever experimentally or socially
you have to build in an evaluation
element to make sure that your stupid
intervention does only what you hoped it
would and not a bunch of other things
many of which are counterproductive it's
a huge problem and but it's not
reducible let's say to the problem of
billionaires per se because the other
advantage of having a multitude of
extremely wealthy people is that you
have massive pools of capital that can
be implemented for all sorts of
technological reasons and you also have
a diversity of what would you say
sources of power which is a good check
against authoritarianism on the on the
political side and
so but I do think the fundamental
solution to that problem is it's an
ethical solution and not an economic
solution is that if you're fortunate
enough to be hyper intelligent for
example or hyper wealthy you better
understand that what comes along with
that is a moral burden that's equivalent
to The Virtue and that if you don't bear
that you're going to be a not only a
destructive force in the world but also
a destructive force for yourself you
don't there's no free lunch even if
you're rich well that's an interesting
thing because what I feel you're doing
here is you're merging right a free
market almost reian right the the the
the alphas get to Alpha with what you
what we started with with your higher
order code or implicant moral law so
rather than just saying free market
sorts it all out and has its own
implicit you know logic right and and
those at the top deserve to be you're
saying hey it's not sufficient yeah
you're see now now you're bringing in
right the Jude Christian I think the
scientific game has to be embedded in
the judeo-christian game let's say but
so does the free market game you know
and people like Adam Smith knew this
that and and the Scottish liberals for
that matter their basic argument was
something like given the presuppositions
of a stable judeo-christian culture and
the ethics that go go along with that
then the liberal free market the free
market Enterprise is possible it's like
and and the more libertarian types they
take the second half of that and
dispense with the first and that's not
going to work that that you need that
underlying ethical scaffold and it's
likely because it's related as we
already pointed out to something
approximating the biological foundations
of psychological stability and growth
and the associated sociological inter
actions that emerge out of that you
can't dispense with that so well well
let's let's talk about this because my
curiosity it feels like I mean and
you're writing a new book right now
right yes it's coming out in November oh
so really soon yeah very soon yeah we
who wrestle with God it's called and it
deals with many of the issues that we're
talking about okay at the moment
including that abrahamic story let's say
well I'm super curious cuz you were
describing the abrahamic story but that
also has Echoes with Jonah right go do a
hard thing go save the people of it has
The Echoes with even if you don't want
to even if you don't want to and outcome
un and you hate them an outcome UNS and
they deserve it right and and and and
put down your nets and go be fishes of
men the Sea of Galilee in the New
Testament to me that's the real gut
punch one right which is at what point
do any of us set aside it's a more
appropriate means of feeding the
multitude right I mean that's part of
the underlying narrative meaning of that
particular that particular element of
the story if you're a fisherman you feed
people and that's a noble Enterprise but
if if you if you entice people into the
proper ethical relationship with one
another you feed everyone right and so
and that's part of a reflection of the
fact that what makes a society wealthy
even in the free
market domain let's say is the
underlying ethos of something like
iterable reciprocity it's the
precondition for wealth and so Christ
transposes the fisherman he says well
you're playing a very useful social role
but there's a meta Ro that you could
play that would do what you do but more
effectively and a bunch of other things
at the same time that's Akin for example
to his suggestion that the intelligent
and wise wealthy individual would sell
everything to obtain the pearl of great
price right because there's there's one
thing to know that's so valuable that
everything else pales in comparison
that's also relevant to the discussion
of what to do with wealth you know I
mean if you're a millionaire and you're
a self-centered hedonist it's like well
first of all you're going to be a very
damaging social Force but it's going to
tear you into pieces in manners that you
could hardly even imagine because you
don't you don't get to misuse a gift
without paying a vicious price for it
you see this with very intelligent
people when they go down the luciferian
rabbit hole you know they're gifted with
their IQ of 145 and they start to
worship their own intelligence it's like
well what did you you ask or or hope for
Elon because he's obviously got probably
as much power as anybody in the human
species well what you hope for Elon is
that his moral compass is functional and
that he he listens to it the same way
that Jonah eventually listened to his
conscience and that he understands and
you know my conversation with Elon I
felt quite positive about who he was
I've met him three or four times and
every time I meet him I'm
more solidly convinced that he's doing
what he can to to aim up and thank God
for that now does that mean that it's
without error well that's a bit much to
ask that's for sure but I was also very
interested in how he reconciled his
existential catastrophe as crisis when
he was an adolescent because he said he
turned to the attractions of infinite
exploration and that that's that's
that's one variant of the infinite game
you know and there's a faith there's a
faith in that that's there's a deep
Faith that's implicit in that that I
think people like Richard Dawkin share
so musk believes that the cosmos has a
logos that it's intelligible that it's
possible that that logos is intelligible
to to the human psyche that that Pursuit
is noble and that undertaken properly
that Pursuit is of wide it's of a broad
ethical benefit both psychologically and
socially and that's that's is is that
arguably your thesis statement as well
yeah definitely definitely when that's
part of the underlying Faith you might
say and it's a kind of Courage
that the created order is fundamentally
good that's that's a start that's why
it's an element of faith that
fundamentally good fundamentally good
yeah fundamentally good yeah yeah this
is one of
the propositions that's put forth very
strongly in the story of Job I mean job
is visited by unimaginable and
undeserved catastrophe so that's who he
is he's the who's been visited by
undeserved catastrophe and job's
response is no matter what happens to me
it's incumbent on me not to lose faith
in myself fundamentally even though I
may be error prone but fundamentally and
not to lose faith in the spirit that
gave rise to the created order is that
my ignorance May Shield me from
realization of the good towards which
everything is progressing but it's
incumbent on me no matter how much I
suffer not to fall prey to that kind of
under find doubt and that's I think
that's Noble and functional and
appropriate and why is God being so
cruel to
job God Only Knows well right but I mean
this is what I find fascinating about
this story in particular is is that the
exog Jesus of that tale is that there
are two two distinct authors through
through several centuries and the first
version of the job story doesn't include
Satan it is Whimsical and arbitrary
Yahweh mhm right and then and then
author two is like well that's a bit of
a plot Problem the problem of evil well
look I think part of the problem is AD
Satan as a plot device Old Testament is
not not not pointy horns and beels above
right Old Testament is Satan the opposer
he's just he's just the friction yeah
adversary the adversary the adversary
yeah well I think part of it I think
there's two parts to that one is that it
isn't obvious to me at all that you
should evaluate the goodness of being in
relationship to the dimensions of
Pleasure and Pain and the reason for
that is that there are many catastrophic
pleasures and there are many beneficial
pains and so you can't reduce you can't
use the honic dimension as the grounds
for evaluation so that's the so whatever
when you're talking about the goodness
or lack thereof of being you can't
reduce that to emotional state partly
because the emotions aren't reliable
guides to the medium and long run as you
know perfectly well because you have to
foro immediate pleasure frequently in
order to gain what to gain what's worth
gaining in the long run so the the the
hedonic dimension of evaluation is the
wrong Dimension well that that feels
like that's anchored to evolutionary
impulse indifferent evolutionary aoral
impulse right if and and most wisdom
Traditions do differentiate if you're
just seeking pleasure and avoiding pain
you're basically just a monkey with
clothes yeah right right right that's
right to be twice born to be anthropos
to subal right like any of those things
to to be a sort of reborn or true human
you need to transcend that in some
way what does the future hold for
business ask nine experts and you'll get
10 answers bull market bare Market rates
will rise rates will fall can somebody
please invent a crystal ball until then
over 38,000 businesses have found a way
to futureproof their operations with
netsuite by Oracle the number one Cloud
Erp imagine having your accounting
financial management inventory and HR
all seamlessly integrated into one fluid
platform that's netw Suite with this
unified business management Suite you're
not just juggling numbers you're
wielding a powerful tool that gives you
the visibility and control to make quick
informed decisions it's like having a
map in a maze of Market uncertainties
real-time insights and forecasting check
it's like peering into the future with
actionable data at your fingertips and
here's the game changer you'll be
closing your books in days not weeks
that means less time drowning in
paperwork and more time focusing on what
truly matters steering your business
towards success here at the daily wire
we are proud to partner with netsuite
because they are leading the way in
future proofing operations for
businesses around the world whether your
company's earning millions or even
hundreds of millions netw Suite adapts
to your needs helping you respond to
immediate challenges and Seize Your
Biggest opportunities speaking of
opportunity download the CFOs guide to
Ai and machine learning at netsuite.com
jbp the guide is free to you at
netsuite.com
jbp that's
net.com
jbp yeah well that's that's part of
maturation it's the replacement of those
more instinctive and immediate desires
and and wants with something that's more
sociologically oriented that's growth
oriented that's long-term that's
iterable that's infinite possibly and
that's mature and and the the point of
mature socialization is to replace
those demands for immediate
gratification let's say with something
that's much more comprehensive and and
also upward expanding right it's like
the definition of civilization in its
proper sense this brings us back to that
Blaze Pascal's god-shaped hole in our
hearts do you think because there has
been a sort of noticeable turn in the
last couple of years of a you know
especially in the millennial generation
right who have been you know I think
Time Magazine did a sort of almost a
tongue-and-cheek me me me generation
cover right to Echo the Baby Boomers me
generation but it's like it's it's on
steroids Amplified by social media these
days and uh Tara Isabella Burton I don't
know if you know her work she wrote
strange rights which is a a fasc she
she's an Oxford PhD and it and it say
it's everything from Soul cycle to to
sleep no more to Burning Man like just
contemporary expressions of semi-
religiosity she writes in the New York
Times and she's been writing about a
turn towards Orthodoxy and how more and
more people are going back not just back
to church where they met might have gone
as kids back that they're like seeking
out Eastern orthodo they're seeking out
like like PR prev Vatican Latin Mass
there was there was even an article in
the Texas monthly on what do they call
them the ortho Bros and there and there
and there's there's a whole set of and
again this is curious but
altright podcaster Bros right like
infiltrating an Armenian Orthodox Church
in Houston let's do this because we're
running out of time on the YouTube side
let's save exactly that discussion for
the additional half an hour on daily
wire okay we can talk about that
compensatory Rebirth of well not only
the religious spirit let's say but the
more Orthodox religious spirit and we
can take that apart so let's do that so
everybody who's watching and listening
you can join us on the daily wire side
for the continuation of this
conversation and that's what we'll delve
into um we we we've noticed and we we
talked a little bit about Jamie and I
talked a little bit about this before
the podcast that there have been
noticeable public conversions even from
the what The Atheist adjacent types like
Ayan hery Ali and Neil Ferguson in
recent years Russell Brand for that
matter and that that is emblematic of
something deeper that's shifting and so
we can talk about that in more detail on
The Daily World side so join us for that
thank you very much for well at least
the first part of this conversation and
we'll we'll continue momentarily thank
you everybody for watching and listening
today
[Music]